Now none could live without food, and men living under the earth needed
it as much as men living on the earth. The royal tomb was thus provided
with an enormous amount of earthly food for the use of the royal ghost,
and with other things as well, as we have seen. The same provision had
also to be made for the royal resting-place at Abydos. And in both cases
royal slaves were needed to take care of all this provision, and to
serve the ghost of the king, whether in his real tomb at Nakâda, or
elsewhere, or in his second tomb at Abydos. Ghosts only could serve
ghosts, so that of the slaves ghosts had to be made. That was easily
done; they died when their master died and followed him to the tomb.
No doubt it seemed perfectly natural to all concerned, to the slaves as
much as to anybody else. But it shows the child’s idea of the value of
life. An animate thing was hardly distinguished at this period from an
inanimate thing. The most ancient Egyptians buried slaves with their
kings as naturally as they buried jars of wine and bins of corn with
them. Both were buried with a definite object. The slaves had to die
before they were buried, but then so had the king himself. They all had
to die sometime or other. And the actual killing of them was no worse
than killing a dog, no worse even than “killing” golden buttons and
ivory boxes. For, when the buttons and boxes were buried with the king,
they were just as much dead as the slaves. Of the sanctity of _human_
life as distinct from other life, there was probably no idea at all. The
royal ghost needed ghostly servants, and they were provided as a matter
of course.

But as civilization progressed, the ideas of the Egyptians changed
on these points, and in the later ages of the ancient world they were
probably the most humane of the peoples, far more so than the Greeks,
in fact. The cultured Hellenes murdered their prisoners of war without
hesitation. Who has not been troubled in mind by the execution of Mkias
and Demosthenes after the surrender of the Athenian army at Syracuse?
When we compare this with Grant’s refusal even to take Lee’s sword
at Appomattox, we see how we have progressed in these matters; while
Gylippus and the Syracusans were as much children as the Ist Dynasty
Egyptians. But the Egyptians of Gylippus’s time had probably advanced
much further than the Greeks in the direction of rational manhood. When
Amasis had his rival Apries in his power, he did not put him to death,
but kept him as his coadjutor on the throne. Apries fled from him,
allied himself with Greek pirates, and advanced against his generous
rival. After his defeat and murder at Momemphis, Amasis gave him a
splendid burial. When we compare this generosity to a beaten foe with
the savagery of the Assyrians, for instance, we see how far the later
Egyptians had progressed in the paths of humanity.

The ancient custom of killing slaves was first discontinued at the death
of the lesser chieftains, but we find a possible survival of it in the
case of a king, even as late as the time of the XIth Dynasty; for at
Thebes, in the precinct of the funerary temple of King Neb-hapet-Râ
Mentuhetep and round the central pyramid which commemorated his memory,
were buried a number of the ladies of his _harîm_. They were all buried
at one and the same time, and there can be little doubt that they were
all killed and buried round the king, in order to be with him in the
next world. Now with each of these ladies, who had been turned into
ghosts, was buried a little waxen human figure placed in a little model
coffin. This was to replace her own slave. She who went to accompany
the king in the next world had to have her own attendant also. But, not
being royal, a real slave was not killed for her; she only took with her
a waxen figure, which by means of charms and incantations would, when
she called upon it, turn into a real slave, and say, “Here am I,” and do
whatever work might be required of her. The actual killing and burial
of the slaves had in all cases except that of the king been long
“commuted,” so to speak, into a burial with the dead person of
_ushabtis_, or “Answerers,” little figures like those described above,
made more usually of stone, and inscribed with the name of the deceased.
They were called “Answerers” because they answered the call of their
dead master or mistress, and by magic power became ghostly servants.
Later on they were made of wood and glazed _faïence_, as well as stone.
By this means the greater humanity of a later age sought a relief from
the primitive disregard of the death of others.

Anthropologically interesting as are the results of the excavations at
Umm el-Gra’ab, they are no less historically important. There is no need
here to weary the reader with the details of scientific controversy; it
will suffice to set before him as succinctly and clearly as possible the
net results of the work which has been done.

Messrs. Amélineau and Petrie have found the secondary tombs and have
identified the names of the following primeval kings of Egypt. We
arrange them in their apparent historical order.

1. Aha Men (?).

2. Narmer (or Betjumer) Sma (?).

3. Tjer (or Khent). Besh.

4. Tja Ati.

5. Den Semti.

6. Atjab Merpeba.

7. Semerkha Nekht.

8. Qâ Sen.

9. Khâsekhem (Khâsekhemui)

10. Hetepsekhemui.

11. Räneb.

12. Neneter.

13. Sekhemab Perabsen.


Two or three other names are ascribed by Prof. Petrie to the
Hierakonpolite dynasty of Upper Egypt, which, as it occurs before the
time of Mena and the Ist Dynasty, he calls “Dynasty 0.” Dynasty 0,
however, is no dynasty, and in any case we should prefer to call the
“predynastic” dynasty “Dynasty I.” The names of “Dynasty minus One,”
 however, remain problematical, and for the present it would seem safer
to suspend judgment as to the place of the supposed royal names “Ro” and
“Ka”(Men-kaf), which Prof. Petrie supposes to have been those of two
of the kings of Upper Egypt who reigned before Mena. The king
“Sma”(“Uniter”) is possibly identical with Aha or Narmer, more
probably the latter. It is not necessary to detail the process by which
Egyptologists have sought to identify these thirteen kings with the
successors of Mena in the lists of kings and the Ist and IId Dynasties
of Manetho. The work has been very successful, though not perhaps quite
so completely accomplished as Prof. Petrie himself inclines to believe.
The first identification was made by Prof. Sethe, of Gottingen, who
pointed out that the names Semti and Merpeba on a vase-fragment found
by M. Amélineau were in reality those of the kings Hesepti and Merbap
of the lists, the Ousaphaïs and Miebis of Manetho. The perfectly certain
identifications are these:--

5. Den Semti = Hesepti, _Ousaphaïs_, Ist Dynasty.

6. Atjab Merpeba = Merbap, _Miebis_, Ist Dynasty.

7. Semerkha Nekht= Shemsu or Semsem (?), _Semempres_, Ist Dynasty.

8. Qâ Sen = Qebh, _Bienehhes_, Ist Dynasty.

9. Khâsekhemui Besh = Betju-mer (?), _Boethos_, IId Dynasty.

10. Neneter = Bineneter, _Binothris_, IId Dynasty.


Six of the Abydos kings have thus been identified with names in the
lists and in Manetho; that is to say, we now know the real names of six
of the earliest Egyptian monarchs, whose appellations are given us
under mutilated forms by the later list-makers. Prof. Petrie further
identifies (4) Tja Ati with Ateth, (3) Tjer with Teta, and (1) Aha with
Mena. Mena, Teta, Ateth, Ata, Hesepti, Merbap, Shemsu (?), and Qebh are
the names of the 1st Dynasty as given in the lists. The equivalent of
Ata Prof. Petrie finds in the name “Merneit,” which is found at Umm
el-Ga’ab. But there is no proof whatever that Merneit was a king; he
was much more probably a prince or other great personage of the reign
of Den, who was buried with the kings. Prof. Petrie accepts the
identification of the personal name of Aha as “Men,” and so makes him
the only equivalent of Mena. But this reading of the name is still
doubtful. Arguing that Aha must be Mena, and having all the rest of the
kings of the Ist Dynasty identified with the names in the lists, Prof.
Petrie is compelled to exclude Narmer from the dynasty, and to relegate
him to “Dynasty 0,” before the time of Mena. It is quite possible,
however, that Narmer was the successor, not the predecessor, of Mena.
He was certainly either the one or the other, as the style of art in his
time was exactly the same as that in the time of Aha. The “Scorpion,”
 too, whose name is found at Hierakonpolis, certainly dates to the same
time as Narmer and Aha, for the style of his work is the same. And it
may well be that he is not to be counted as a separate king, belonging
to “Dynasty 0 “(or “Dynasty -I”) at all, but as identical with Narmer,
just as “Sma” may also be. We thus find that the two kings who left the
most developed remains at Hierakonpolis are the two whose monuments at
Abydos are the oldest of all on that site. That is to say, the kings
whose monuments record the conquest of the North belong to the period
of transition from the old Hierakonpolite dominion of Upper Egypt to the
new kingdom of all Egypt. They, in fact, represent the “Mena” or Menés
of tradition. It may be that Aha bore the personal name of _Men_, which
would thus be the original of Mena, but this is uncertain. In any case
both Aha and Narmer must be assigned to the Ist Dynasty, with the result
that we know of more kings belonging to the dynasty than appear in the
lists.

Nor is this improbable. Manetho’s list is evidently based upon old
Egyptian lists derived from the authorities upon which the king-lists of
Abydos and Sakkâra were based. These old lists were made under the
XIXth Dynasty, when an interest in the oldest kings seems to have been
awakened, and the ruling monarchs erected temples at Abydos in their
honour. This phenomenon can only have been due to a discovery of Umm
el-Ga’ab and its treasures, the tombs of which were recognized as
the burial-places (real or secondary) of the kings before the
pyramid-builders. Seti I. and his son Ramses then worshipped the kings
of Umm el-Ga’ab, with their names set before them in the order, number,
and spelling in which the scribes considered they ought to be inscribed.
It is highly probable that the number known at that time was not quite
correct. We know that the spelling of the names was very much garbled
(to take one example only, the signs for _Sen_ were read as one sign
_Qebh_), so that one or two kings may have been omitted or displaced.
This may be the case with Narmer, or, as his name ought possibly to be
read, _Betjumer_. His monuments show by their style that he belongs to
the very beginning of the Ist Dynasty. No name in the Ist Dynasty list
corresponds to his. But one of the lists gives for the first king of the
IId Dynasty (the successor of “Qebh” = Sen) a name which may also be read
Betjumer, spelt syllabically this time, not ideographically. On this
account Prof. Naville wishes to regard the Hierakonpolite monuments of
Narmer as belonging to the IId Dynasty, but, as we have seen, they are
among the most archaic known, and certainly must belong to the beginning
of the Ist Dynasty. It is therefore probable that Khasekhemui Besh
and Narmer (Betjumer?) were confused by this list-maker, and the
name Betjumer was given to the first king of the IId Dynasty, who was
probably in reality Khasekhemui. The resemblance of _Betju_ to _Besh_
may have contributed to this confusion.

So Narmer (or Betjumer) found his way out of his proper place at the
beginning of the 1st Dynasty. Whether Aha was also called “Men” or not,
it seems evident that he and Narmer were jointly the originals of the
legendary Mena. Narmer, who possibly also bore the name of Sma, “the
Uniter,” conquered the North. Aha, “the Fighter,” also ruled both South
and North at the same period. Khasekhemui, too, conquered the North, but
the style of his monuments shows such an advance upon that of the days
of Aha and Narmer that it seems best to make him the successor of Sen
(or “Qebh “), and, explaining the transference of the name Betjumer
to the beginning of the IId Dynasty as due to a confusion with
Khasekhemui’s personal name Besh, to make Khasekhemui the founder of the
IId Dynasty. The beginning of a new dynasty may well have been marked
by a reassertion of the new royal power over Lower Egypt, which may have
lapsed somewhat under the rule of the later kings of the Ist Dynasty.

Semti is certainly the “Hesepti” of the lists, and Tja Ati is probably
“Ateth.” “Ata” is thus unidentified. Prof. Petrie makes him = Merneit,
but, as has already been said, there is no proof that the tomb of
Merneit is that of a king. “Teta” may be Tjer or Khent, but of this
there is no proof. It is most probable that the names “Teta,” “Ateth,”
 and “Ata” are all founded on Ati, the personal name of Tja. The king
Tjer is then not represented in the lists, and “Mena” is a compound of
the two oldest Abydos kings, Narmer (Betjumer) Sma (?) and Aha Men (?).

These are the bare historical results that have been attained with
regard to the names, identity, and order of the kings. The smaller
memorials that have been found with them, especially the ivory plaques,
have told us of events that took place during their reigns; but, with
the exception of the constantly recurring references to the conquest of
the North, there is little that can be considered of historical interest
or importance. We will take one as an example. This is the tablet No.
32,650 of the British Museum, illustrated by Prof. Petrie, _Royal Tombs_
i (Egypt Exploration Fund), pi. xi, 14, xv, 16. This is the record of
a single year, the first in the reign of Semti, King of Upper and Lower
Egypt. On it we see a picture of a king performing a religious dance
before the god Osiris, who is seated in a shrine placed on a dais. This
religious dance was performed by all the kings in later times. Below we
find hieroglyphic (ideographic) records of a river expedition to fight
the Northerners and of the capture of a fortified town called An. The
capture of the town is indicated by a broken line of fortification,
half-encircling the name, and the hoe with which the emblematic hawks
on the slate reliefs already described are armed; this signifies the
opening and breaking down of the wall.

On the other half of the tablet we find the viceroy of Lower Egypt,
Hemaka, mentioned; also “the Hawk (i. e. the king) seizes the seat of
the Libyans,” and some unintelligible record of a jeweller of the palace
and a king’s carpenter. On a similar tablet (of Sen) we find the words
“the king’s carpenter made this record.” All these little tablets are
then the records of single years of a king’s life, and others like them,
preserved no doubt in royal archives, formed the base of regular annals,
which were occasionally carved upon stone. We have an example of one of
these in the “Stele of Palermo,” a fragment of black granite, inscribed
with the annals of the kings up to the time of the Vth Dynasty, when
the monument itself was made. It is a matter for intense regret that the
greater portion of this priceless historical monument has disappeared,
leaving us but a piece out of the centre, with part of the records
of only six kings before Snefru. Of these six the name of only one,
Neneter, of the lid Dynasty, whose name is also found at Abydos, is
mentioned. The only important historical event of Neneter’s reign seems
to have occurred in his thirteenth year, when the towns or palaces of
_Ha_ (“North”) and Shem-Râ (“The Sun proceeds”) were founded. Nothing
but the institution and celebration of religious festivals is recorded
in the sixteen yearly entries preserved to us out of a reign of
thirty-five years. The annual height of the Nile is given, and the
occasions of numbering the people are recorded (every second year):
nothing else. Manetho tells us that in the reign of Binothris, who
is Neneter, it was decreed that women could hold royal honours and
privileges. This first concession of women’s rights is not mentioned on
the strictly official “Palermo Stele.”

More regrettable than aught else is the absence from the “Palermo Stele”
 of that part of the original monument which gave the annals of the
earliest kings. At any rate, in the lines of annals which still exist
above that which contains the chronicle of the reign of Neneter no
entry can be definitely identified as belonging to the reigns of Aha
or Narmer. In a line below there is a mention of the “birth of
Khâsekhemui,” apparently a festival in honour of the birth of that king
celebrated in the same way as the reputed birthday of a god. This shows
the great honour in which Khâsekhemui was held, and perhaps it was he
who really finally settled the question of the unification of North and
South and consolidated the work of the earlier kings.

As far as we can tell, then, Aha and Narmer were the first conquerors
of the North, the unifiers of the kingdom, and the originals of the
legendary Mena. In their time the kingdom’s centre of gravity was still
in the South, and Narmer (who is probably identical with “the Scorpion”)
dedicated the memorials of his deeds in the temple of Hierakonpolis. It
may be that the legend of the founding of Memphis in the time of “Menés”
 is nearly correct (as we shall see, historically, the foundation may
have been due to Merpeba), but we have the authority of Manetho for
the fact that the first two dynasties were “Thinite” (that is, Upper
Egyptian), and that Memphis did not become the capital till the time of
the Hid Dynasty. With this statement the evidence of the monuments fully
agrees. The earliest royal tombs in the pyramid-field of Memphis date
from the time of the Hid Dynasty, so that it is evident that the kings
had then taken up their abode in the Northern capital. We find that soon
after the time of Khâsekhemui the king Perabsen was especially connected
with Lower Egypt. His personal name is unknown to us (though he may
be the “Uatjnes” of the lists), but we do know that he had two
banner-names, Sekhem-ab and Perabsen. The first is his hawk or
Horus-name, the second his Set-name; that is to say, while he bore the
first name as King of Upper Egypt under the special patronage of Horus,
the hawk-god of the Upper Country, he bore the second as King of Lower
Egypt, under the patronage of Set, the deity of the Delta, whose fetish
animal appears above this name instead of the hawk. This shows how
definitely Perabsen wished to appear as legitimate King of Lower as well
as Upper Egypt. In later times the Theban kings of the XIIth Dynasty,
when they devoted themselves to winning the allegiance of the
Northerners by living near Memphis rather than at Thebes, seem to have
been imitating the successors of Khâsekhemui.

Moreover, we now find various evidences of increasing connection with
the North. A princess named Ne-maat-hap, who seems to have been the
mother of Sa-nekht, the first king of the Hid Dynasty, bears the name of
the sacred Apis of Memphis, her name signifying “Possessing the right of
Apis.” According to Manetho, the kings of the Hid Dynasty are the first
Memphites, and this seems to be quite correct. With Ne-maat-hap the
royal right seems to have been transferred to a Memphite house. But the
Memphites still had associations with Upper Egypt: two of them, Tjeser
Khet-neter and Sa-nekht, were buried near Abydos, in the desert at Bêt
Khallâf, where their tombs were discovered and excavated by Mr. Garstang
in 1900. The tomb of Tjeser is a great brick-built mastaba, forty feet
high and measuring 300 feet by 150 feet. The actual tomb-chambers are
excavated in the rock, twenty feet below the ground-level and sixty feet
below the top of the mastaba. They had been violated in ancient times,
but a number of clay jar-sealings, alabaster vases, and bowls belonging
to the tomb furniture were found by the discoverer. Sa-nekht’s tomb is
similar. In it was found the preserved skeleton of its owner, who was a
giant seven feet high.

[Illustration: 082.jpg THE TOMB OF KING TJESER AT BÊT KHALLÂF. About
3700 B.C.]

It is remarkable that Manetho chronicles among the kings of the early
period a king named Sesokhris, who was five cubits high. This may have
been Sa-nekht.

Tjeser had two tombs, one, the above-mentioned, near Abydos, the
other at Sakkâra, in the Memphite pyramid-field. This is the famous
Step-Pyramid. Since Sa-nekht seems really to have been buried at Bêt
Khal-laf, probably Tjeser was, too, and the Step-Pyramid may have been
his secondary or sham tomb, erected in the necropolis of Memphis as a
compliment to Seker, the Northern god of the dead, just as Aha had his
secondary tomb at Abydos in compliment to Khentamenti. Sne-feru, also,
the last king of the Hid Dynasty, seems to have had two tombs. One of
these was the great Pyramid of Mêdûm, which was explored by Prof. Petrie
in 1891, the other was at Dashûr. Near by was the interesting necropolis
already mentioned, in which was discovered evidence of the continuance
of the cramped position of burial and of the absence of mummification
among a certain section of the population even as late as the time of
the IVth Dynasty. This has been taken to imply that the fusion of the
primitive Neolithic and invading sub-Semitic races had not been effected
at that time.

With the IVth Dynasty the connection of the royal house with the South
seems to have finally ceased. The governmental centre of gravity was
finally transferred to Memphis, and the kings were thenceforth for
several centuries buried in the great pyramids which still stand in
serried order along the western desert border of Egypt, from the Delta
to the province of the Fayyum. With the latest discoveries in this
Memphite pyramid-field we shall deal in the next chapter.

The transference of the royal power to Memphis under the Hid Dynasty
naturally led to a great increase of Egyptian activity in the Northern
lands. We read in Manetho of a great Libyan war in the reign of
Neche-rophes, and both Sa-nekht and Tjeser seem to have finally
established Egyptian authority in the Sinaitic peninsula, where their
rock-inscriptions have been found.

In 1904 Prof. Petrie was despatched to Sinai by the Egypt Exploration
Fund, in order finally to record the inscriptions of the early kings
in the Wadi Maghara, which had been lately very much damaged by the
operations of the turquoise-miners. It seems almost incredible that
ignorance and vandalism should still be so rampant in the twentieth
century that the most important historical monuments are not safe from
desecration in order to obtain a few turquoises, but it is so. Prof.
Petrie’s expedition did not start a day too soon, and at the suggestion
of Sir William Garstin, the adviser to the Ministry of the Interior, the
majority of the inscriptions have been removed to the Cairo Museum for
safety and preservation. Among the new inscriptions discovered is one of
Sa-nekht, which is now in the British Museum. Tjeser and Sa-nekht were
not the first Egyptian kings to visit Sinai. Already, in the days of the
1st Dynasty, Semerkha had entered that land and inscribed his name upon
the rocks. But the regular annexation, so to speak, of Sinai to Egypt
took place under the Memphites of the Hid Dynasty.

With the Hid Dynasty we have reached the age of the pyramid-builders.
The most typical pyramids are those of the three great kings of the IVth
Dynasty, Khufu, Khafra, and Menkaura, at Giza near Cairo. But, as
we have seen, the last king of the Hid Dynasty, Snefru, also had one
pyramid, if not two; and the most ancient of these buildings known to
us, the Step-Pyramid of Sakkâra, was erected by Tjeser at the beginning
of that dynasty. The evolution of the royal tombs from the time of the
1st Dynasty to that of the IVth is very interesting to trace. At the
period of transition from the predynastic to the dynastic age we have
the great mastaba of Aha at Nakâda, and the simplest chamber-tombs
at Abydos. All these were of brick; no stone was used in their
construction. Then we find the chamber-tomb of Den Semti at Abydos
with a granite floor, the walls being still of brick. Above each of the
Abydos tombs was probably a low mound, and in front a small chapel, from
which a flight of steps descended into the simple chamber. On one of the
little plaques already mentioned, which were found in these tombs, we
have an archaic inscription, entirely written in ideographs, which
seems to read, “The Big-Heads (i. e. the chiefs) come to the tomb.” The
ideograph for “tomb” seems to be a rude picture of the funerary chapel,
but from it we can derive little information as to its construction.
Towards the end of the Ist Dynasty, and during the lid, the royal tombs
became much more complicated, being surrounded with numerous chambers
for the dead slaves, etc. Khâsekhemui’s tomb has thirty-three such
chambers, and there is one large chamber of stone. We know of no other
instance of the use of stone work for building at this period except in
the royal tombs. No doubt the mason’s art was still so difficult that it
was reserved for royal use only.

Under the Hid Dynasty we find the last brick mastabas built for royalty,
at Bêt Khallâf, and the first pyramids, in the Memphite necropolis.
In the mastaba of Tjeser at Bêt Khallâf stone was used for the great
portcullises which were intended to bar the way to possible plunderers
through the passages of the tomb. The Step-Pyramid at Sakkâra is, so to
speak, a series of mastabas of stone, imposed one above the other; it
never had the continuous casing of stone which is the mark of a true
pyramid. The pyramid of Snefru at Mêdûm is more developed. It also
originated in a mastaba, enlarged, and with another mastaba-like
erection on the top of it; but it was given a continuous sloping casing
of fine limestone from bottom to top, and so is a true pyramid. A
discussion of recent theories as to the building of the later pyramids
of the IVth Dynasty will be found in the next chapter.

In the time of the Ist Dynasty the royal tomb was known by the name of
“Protection-around-the-Hawk, i.e. the king”(_Sa-ha-heru_); but under
the Hid and IVth Dynasties regular names, such as “the Firm,” “the
Glorious,” “the Appearing,” etc., were given to each pyramid.

[Illustration: 086.jpg FALSE DOOR OF THE TOMB OF TETA, about 3600 B.C.]

We must not omit to note an interesting point in connection with the
royal tombs at Abydos, In that of King Khent or Tjer (the reading of
the ideograph is doubtful) M. Amélineau found a large bed or bier of
granite, with a figure of the god Osiris lying in state sculptured in
high relief upon it. This led him to jump to the conclusion that he
had found the tomb of the god Osiris himself, and that a skull he found
close by was the veritable cranium of the primeval folk-hero, who,
according to the euhemerist theory, was the deified original of the god.
The true explanation is given by Dr. Wallis Budge in his _History of
Egypt_, i, p. 19. It is a fact that the tomb of Tjer was regarded by
the Egyptians of the XIXth Dynasty as the veritable tomb of Osiris.
They thought they had discovered it, just as M. Amélineau did. When the
ancient royal tombs of Umm el-Ga’ab were rediscovered and identified at
the beginning of the XIXth Dynasty, and Seti I built the great temple of
Abydos to the divine ancestors in honour of the discovery, embellishing
it with a relief of himself and his son Ramses making offerings to the
names of his predecessors (the “Tablet of Abydos “), the name of King
Khent or Tjer (which is perhaps the really correct original form) was
read by the royal scribes as “Khent” and hastily identified with the
first part of the name of the god _Khent-amenti_ Osiris, the lord of
Abydos. The tomb was thus regarded as the tomb of Osiris himself, and
it was furnished with a great stone figure of the god lying on his bier,
attended by the two hawks of Isis and Nephthys; ever after the site was
visited by crowds of pilgrims, who left at Umm el-Ga’ab the thousands of
little votive vases whose fragments have given the place its name of the
“Mother of Pots.” This is the explanation of the discovery of the “Tomb
of Osiris.” We have not found what M. Amélineau seems rather naively to
have thought possible, a confirmation of the ancient view that Osiris
was originally a man who ruled over Egypt and was deified after his
death; but we have found that the Egyptians themselves were more or less
euhemerists, and did think so.

It may seem remarkable that all this new knowledge of ancient Egypt is
derived from tombs and has to do with the resting-places of the kings
when dead, rather than with their palaces or temples when living. Of
temples at this early period we have no trace. The oldest temple in
Egypt is perhaps the little chapel in front of the pyramid of Snefru at
Mêdûm. We first hear of temples to the gods under the IVth Dynasty, but
of the actual buildings of that period we have recovered nothing but one
or two inscribed blocks of stone. Prof. Petrie has traced out the plan
of the oldest temple of Osiris at Abydos, which may be of the time of
Khufu, from scanty evidences which give us but little information. It is
certain, however, that this temple, which is clearly one of the oldest
in Egypt, goes back at least to his time. Its site is the mound
called Kom es-Sultan, “The Mound of the King,” close to the village of
el-Kherba, and on the borders of the cultivation northeast of the royal
tombs at Umm el-Oa’ab.

Of royal palaces we have more definite information. North of the Kom
es-Sultan are two great fortress-enclosures of brick: the one is known
as _Sûnet es-Zebîb_, “the Storehouse of Dried Orapes;” the other is
occupied by the Coptic monastery of Dêr Anba Musâs. Both are certainly
fortress-palaces of the earliest period of the Egyptian monarchy. We
know from the small record-plaques of this period that the kings were
constantly founding or repairing places of this kind, which were always
great rectangular enclosures with crenelated brick walls like those of
early Babylonian buildings.

We have seen that the Northern Egyptian possessed similar
fortress-cities which were captured by Narmer. These were the seats of
the royal residence in various parts of the country. Behind their walls
was the king’s house, and no doubt also a town of nobles and retainers,
while the peasants lived on the arable land without.

[Illustration: 089.jpg THE SHUNET EZ-ZEBIB: THE FORTRESS-TOWN, About
3900 B.C.]

The Shûnet ez-Zebîb and its companion fortress were evidently the royal
cities of the 1st and IId Dynasties at Abydos. The former has been
excavated by Mr. E. R. Ayrton for the Egypt Exploration Fund, under the
supervision of Prof. Petrie. He found jar-sealings of Khâsekhemui and
Perabsen. In later times the place was utilized as a burial-place for
ibis-mummies (it had already been abandoned as a city before the time of
the XIIth Dynasty), and from this fact it received the name of _Shenet
deb-hib_, or “Storehouse of Ibis Burials.” The Arab invaders adapted
this name to their own language in the nearest form which would have
any meaning, as _Shûnet ez-Zebïb_, “the Storehouse of Dried Grapes.”
 The Arab word _shûna_ (“Barn” or “Storehouse”) was, it should be noted,
taken over from the Coptic _sheune,_ which is the old-Egyptian _shenet_.
The identity of _sheune_ or _shûna_ with the German “Scheune” is a
quaint and curious coincidence. In the illustration of the Shûnet
ez-Zebib the curved line of crenelated wall, following the contour of
the hill, should be noted, as it is a remarkable example of the building
of this early period.

It will have been seen from the foregoing description of what
far-reaching importance the discoveries at Abydos have been. A new
chapter of the history of the human race has been opened, which contains
information previously undreamt of, information which Egyptologists
had never dared to hope would be recovered. The sand of Egypt indeed
conceals inexhaustible treasures, and no one knows what the morrow’s
work may bring forth.

_Ex Africa semper aliquid novi!_




CHAPTER III--MEMPHIS AND THE PYRAMIDS


Memphis, the “beautiful abode,” the “City of the White Wall,” is said
to have been founded by the legendary Menés, who in order to build it
diverted the stream of the Nile by means of a great dyke constructed
near the modern village of Koshêsh, south of the village of Mitrahêna,
which marks the central point of the ancient metropolis of Northern
Egypt. It may be that the city was founded by Aha or Narmer, the
historical originals of Mena or Menés; but we have another theory with
regard to its foundation, that it was originally built by King Merpeba
Atjab, whose tomb was also discovered at Abydos near those of Aha and
Narmer. Merpeba is the oldest king whose name is absolutely identified
with one occurring in the XIXth Dynasty king-lists and in Manetho. He
is certainly the “Merbap” or “Merbepa” (“Merbapen”) of the lists and the
_Miebis_ of Manetho. In both the lists and in Manetho he stands fifth in
order from Mena, and he was therefore the sixth king of the Ist Dynasty.
The lists, Manetho, and the small monuments in his own tomb agree in
making him the immediate successor of Semti Den (Ousaphaïs), and from
the style of these latter it is evident that he comes after Tja, Tjer,
Narmer, and Aha. That is to say, the contemporary evidence makes him the
fifth king from Aha, the first original of “Menés.”

Now after the piety of Seti I had led him to erect a great temple at
Abydos in memory of the ancient kings, whose sepulchres had probably
been brought to light shortly before, and to compile and set up in the
temple a list of his predecessors, a certain pious snobbery or snobbish
piety impelled a worthy named Tunure, who lived at Memphis, to put up in
his own tomb at Sakkâra a tablet of kings like the royal one at Abydos.
If Osiris-Khentamenti at Abydos had his tablet of kings, so should
Osiris-Seker at Sakkâra. But Tunure does not begin his list with Mena;
his initial king is Merpeba. For him Merpeba was the first monarch to be
commemorated at Sakkâra. Does not this look very much as if the strictly
historical Merpeba, not the rather legendary and confused Mena, was
regarded as the first Memphite king? It may well be that it was in
the reign of Merpeba, not in that of Aha or Narmer, that Memphis was
founded.

The XIXth Dynasty lists of course say nothing about Mena or Merpeba
having founded Memphis; they only give the names of the kings, nothing
more. The earliest authority for the ascription of Memphis to “Menés”,
is Herodotus, who was followed in this ascription, as in many other
matters, by Manetho; but it must be remembered that Manetho was writing
for the edification of a Greek king (Ptolemy Philadelphus) and his Greek
court at Alexandria, and had therefore to evince a respect for the great
Greek classic which he may not always have really felt. Herodotus is
not, of course, accused of any wilful misstatement in this or in any
other matter in which his accuracy is suspected. He merely wrote
down what he was told by the Egyptians themselves, and Merpeba was
sufficiently near in time to Aha to be easily confounded with him by
the scribes of the Persian period, who no doubt ascribed everything
to “Mena” that was done by the kings of the Ist and IId Dynasties.
Therefore it may be considered quite probable that the “Menés” who
founded Memphis was Merpeba, the fifth or sixth king of the Ist Dynasty,
whom Tunure, a thousand years before the time of Herodotus and his
informants, placed at the head of the Memphite “List of Sakkâra.”

The reconquest of the North by Khâsekhemui doubtless led to a further
strengthening of Memphis; and it is quite possible that the deeds of
this king also contributed to make up the sum total of those ascribed to
the Herodotean and Manethonian Menés.

It may be that a town of the Northerners existed here before the time of
the Southern Conquest, for Phtah, the local god of Memphis, has a very
marked character of his own, quite different from that of Khen-tamenti,
the Osiris of Abydos. He is always represented as a little bow-legged
hydrocephalous dwarf very like the Phoenician _Kabeiroi_. It may be
that here is another connection between the Northern Egyptians and the
Semites. The name “Phtah,” the “Opener,” is definitely Semitic. We may
then regard the dwarf Phtah as originally a non-Egyptian god of the
Northerners, probably Semitic in origin, and his town also as antedating
the conquest. But it evidently was to the Southerners that Memphis owed
its importance and its eventual promotion to the position of capital of
the united kingdom. Then the dwarf Phtah saw himself rivalled by another
Phtah of Southern Egyptian origin, who had been installed at Memphis by
the Southerners. This Phtah was a sort of modified edition of Osiris, in
mummy-form and holding crook and whip, but with a refined edition of
the Kabeiric head of the indigenous Phtah. The actual god of “the White
Wall” was undoubtedly confused vith the dead god of the necropolis,
whose name was Seker or Sekri (Sokari), “the Coffined.” The original
form of this deity was a mummied hawk upon a coffin, and it is very
probable that he was imported from the South, like the second Phtah, at
the time of the conquest, when the great Northern necropolis began
to grow up as a duplicate of that at Abydos. Later on we find Seker
confused with the ancient dwarf-god, and it is the latter who was
afterwards chiefly revered as Phtah-Socharis-Osiris, the protector of
the necropolis, the mummied Phtah being the generally recognized ruler
of the City of the White Wall.

It is from the name of Seker that the modern Sak-kâra takes its title.
Sakkâra marks the central point of the great Memphite necropolis, as it
is the nearest point of the western desert to Memphis. Northwards the
necropolis extended to Griza and Abu Roâsh, southwards, to Daslmr;
even the nécropoles of Lisht and Mêdûm may be regarded as appanages of
Sakkâra. At Sakkâra itself Tjeser of the IIId Dynasty had a pyramid,
which, as we have seen, was probably not his real tomb (which was
the great mastaba at Bêt Khallâf), but a secondary or sham tomb
corresponding to the “tombs” of the earliest kings at Umm el-Ga’ab in
the necropolis of Abydos. Many later kings, however, especially of the
Vith Dynasty, were actually buried at Sakkâra. Their tombs have all been
thoroughly described by their discoverer, Prof. Maspero, in his history.
The last king of the Hid Dynasty, Snefru, was buried away down south at
Mêdûm, in splendid isolation, but he may also have had a second pyramid
at Sakkâra or Abu Roash.

The kings of the IVth Dynasty were the greatest of the pyramid builders,
and to them belong the huge edifices of Griza. The Vth Dynasty favoured
Abusîr, between Cîza and Sakkâra; the Vith, as we have said, preferred
Sakkâra itself. With them the end of the Old Kingdom and of Memphite
dominion was reached; the sceptre fell from the hands of the Memphite
kings and was taken up by the princes of Herakleopolis (Ahnasyet
el-Medina, near Béni Suêf, south of the Eayyûm) and Thebes. Where the
Herakleopolite kings were buried we do not know; probably somewhere in
the local necropolis of the Gebel es-Sedment, between Ahnasya and the
Fayyûm. The first Thebans (the XIth Dynasty) were certainly buried at
Thebes, but when the Herakleopolites had finally disappeared, and all
Egypt was again united under one strong sceptre, the Theban kings seem
to have been drawn northwards. They removed to the seat of the dominion
of those whom they had supplanted, and they settled in the neighbourhood
of Herakleopolis, near the fertile province of the Fayyûm, and between
it and Memphis. Here, in the royal fortress-palace of Itht-taui,
“Controlling the Two Lands,” the kings of the XIIth Dynasty lived,
and they were buried in the nécropoles of Dashûr, Lisht, and Illahun
(Hawara), in pyramids like those of the old Memphite kings. These facts,
of the situation of Itht-taui, of their burial in the southern an ex of
the old necropolis of Memphis, and of the fori of their tombs (the
true Upper Egyptian and Thebian form was a rock-cut gallery and chamber
driven deep into the hill), show how solicitous were the Amenemhats
and Senusrets of the suffrages of Lower Egypt, how anxious they were to
conciliate the ancient royal pride of Memphis.

Where the kings of the XIIIth Dynasty and the Hyksos or “Shepherds” were
buried, we do not know. The kings of the restored Theban empire were
all interred at Thebes. There are, in fact, no known royal sepulchres
between the Fayyûm and Abydos. The great kings were mostly buried in
the neighbourhood of Memphis, Abydos, and Thebes. The sepulchres of the
“Middle Empire”--the XIth to XIIIth Dynasties--in the neighbourhood
of the Fayyûm may fairly be grouped with those of the same period at
Dashûr, which belongs to the necropolis of Memphis, since it is only a
mile or two south of Sakkâra.

It is chiefly with regard to the sepulchres of the kings that the most
momentous discoveries of recent years have been made at Thebes, and at
Sakkâra, Abusîr, Dashûr, and Lisht, as at Abydos. For this reason we
deal in succession with the finds in the nécropoles of Abydos, Memphis,
and Thebes respectively. And with the sepulchres of the “Old Kingdom,”
 in the Memphite necropolis proper, we have naturally grouped those of
the “Middle Kingdom” at Dashûr, Lisht, Illahun, and Hawara.

Some of these modern discoveries have been commented on and illustrated
by Prof. Maspero in his great history. But the discoveries that have
been made since this publication have been very important,--those at
Abusîr, indeed, of first-rate importance, though not so momentous as
those of the tombs of the Ist and IId Dynasties at Abydos, already
described. At Abu Roash and at Gîza, at the northern end of the Memphite
necropolis, several expeditions have had considerable success, notably
those of the American Dr. Reisner, assisted by Mr. Mace, who excavated
the royal tombs at Umm el-Ga’ab for Prof. Petrie, those of the
German Drs. Steindorff and Borchardt,--the latter working for the
_Beutsch-Orient Gesellschaft_,--and those of other American excavators.
Until the full publication of the results of these excavations appears,
very little can be said about them. Many mastaba-tombs have, it is
understood, been found, with interesting remains. Nothing of great
historical importance seems to have been discovered, however. It is
otherwise when we come to the discoveries of Messrs. Borchardt and
Schâfer at Abusîr, south of Gîza and north of Sakkâra. At this place
results of first-rate historical importance have been attained.

The main group of pyramids at Abusir consists of the tombs of the kings
Sahurà, Neferarikarâ, and Ne-user-Râ, of the Vth Dynasty. The pyramids
themselves are smaller than those of Gîza, but larger than those of
Sakkâra. In general appearance and effect they resemble those of Gîza,
but they are not so imposing, as the desert here is low. Those of Gîza,
Sakkâra, and Dashûr owe much of their impressiveness to the fact that
they are placed at some height above the cultivated land. The excavation
and planning of these pyramids were carried out by Messrs. Borchardt and
Schâfer at the expense of Baron von Bissing, the well-known Egyptologist
of Munich, and of the _Deutsch-Orient Gesell-schaft_ of Berlin. The
antiquities found have been divided between the museums of Berlin and
Cairo.

One of the most noteworthy discoveries was that of the funerary temple
of Ne-user-Râ, which stood at the base of his pyramid. The plan is
interesting, and the granite lotus-bud columns found are the most
ancient yet discovered in Egypt. Much of the paving and the wainscoting
of the walls was of fine black marble, beautifully polished. An
interesting find was a basin and drain with lion’s-head mouth, to
carry away the blood of the sacrifices. Some sculptures in relief were
discovered, including a gigantic representation of the king and the
goddess Isis, which shows that in the early days of the Vth Dynasty the
king and the gods were already depicted in exactly the same costume as
they wore in the days of the Ramses and the Ptolemies. The hieratic art
of Egypt had, in fact, now taken on itself the final outward appearance
which it retained to the very end. There is no more of the archaism
and absence of conventionality, which marks the art of the earliest
dynasties.

We can trace by successive steps the swift development of Egyptian art
from the rude archaism of the Ist Dynasty to its final consummation
under the Vth, when the conventions became fixed. In the time of
Khäsekhemui, at the beginning of the IId Dynasty, the archaic character
of the art has already begun to wear off. Under the same dynasty we
still have styles of unconventional naïveté, such as the famous Statue
“No. 1” of the Cairo Museum, bearing the names of Kings Hetepahaui,
Neb-râ, and Neneter. But with the IVth Dynasty we no longer look for
unconventionality. Prof. Petrie discovered at Abydos a small ivory
statuette of Khufu or Cheops, the builder of the Great Pyramid of Gîza.
The portrait is a good one and carefully executed. It was not till
the time of the XVIIIth Dynasty, indeed, that the Egyptians ceased
to portray their kings as they really were, and gave them a purely
conventional type of face. This convention, against which the heretical
King Amenhetep IV (Akhunaten) rebelled, in order to have himself
portrayed in all his real ungainliness and ugliness, did not exist till
long after the time of the IVth and Vth Dynasties.

[Illustration: 100.jpg STATUE NO. 1 OF THE CAIRO MUSEUM, About 3900
B.C.]

The kings of the XIIth Dynasty especially were most careful that their
statues should be accurate portraits; indeed, the portraits of Usertsen
(Senusret) III vary from a young face to an old one, showing that the
king was faithfully depicted at different periods of his life.

But the general conventions of dress and deportment were finally fixed
under the Vth Dynasty. After this time we no longer have such absolutely
faithful and original presentments as the other little ivory statuette
found by Prof. Petrie at Abydos (now in the British Museum), which shows
us an aged monarch of the Ist Dynasty. It is obvious that the features
are absolutely true to life, and the figure wears an unconventionally
party-coloured and bordered robe of a kind which kings of a later day
may have worn in actual life, but which they would assuredly never be
depicted as wearing by the artists of their day. To the end of Egyptian
history, the kings, even the Roman emperors, were represented on the
monuments clothed in the official costume of their ancestors of the IVth
and Vth Dynasties, in the same manner as we see Khufu wearing his robe
in the little figure from Abydos, and Ne-user-Rà on the great
relief from Abusîr. There are one or two exceptions, such as the
representations of the original genius Akhunaten at Tell el-Amarna and
the beautiful statue of Ramses II at Turin, in which we see these kings
wearing the real costume of their time, but such exceptions are very
rare.

The art of Abusîr is therefore of great interest, since it marks the end
of the development of the priestly art. Secular art might develop as it
liked, though the crystallizing influence of the ecclesiastical canon is
always evident here also. But henceforward it was an impiety, which only
an Akhunaten could commit, to depict a king or a god on the walls of a
temple otherwise (except so far as, the portrait was concerned) than as
he had been depicted in the time of the Vth Dynasty.

Other buildings have been excavated by the Germans at Abusîr, notably
the usual town of mastaba-tombs belonging to the chief dignitaries of
the reign, which is always found at the foot of a royal pyramid of this
period. Another building of the highest interest, belonging to the same
age, was also excavated, and its true character was determined. This is
a building at a place called er-Rîgha or Abû Ghuraib, “Father of Crows,”
 between Abusîr and Gîza. It was formerly supposed to be a pyramid, but
the German excavations have shown that it is really a temple of the
Sun-god Râ of Heliopolis, specially venerated by the kings of the Vth
Dynasty, who were of Heliopolitan origin. The great pyramid-builders of
the IVth Dynasty seem to have been the last true Memphites. At the end
of the reign of Shepseskaf, the last monarch of the dynasty, the sceptre
passed to a Heliopolitan family. The following VIth Dynasty may again
have been Memphite, but this is uncertain. The capital continued to be
Memphis, and from the beginning of the Hid Dynasty to the end of the Old
Kingdom and the rise of Herakle-opolis and Thebes, Memphis remained the
chief city of Egypt.

The Heliopolitans were naturally the servants of the Sun-god above all
other gods, and they were the first to call themselves “Sons of the
Sun,” a title retained by the Pharaohs throughout all subsequent
history. It was Ne-user-Râ who built the Sun-temple of Abu Ghuraib,
on the edge of the desert, north of his pyramid and those of his two
immediate predecessors at Abusir. As now laid bare by the excavations of
1900, it is seen to consist of an artificial mound, with a great court
in front to the eastward. On the mound was erected a truncated obelisk,
the stone emblem of the Sun-god. The worshippers in the court below
looked towards the Sun’s stone erected upon its mound in the west,
the quarter of the sun’s setting; for the Sun-god of Heliopolis was
primarily the setting sun, Tum-Râ, not Râ Harmachis, the rising sun,
whose emblem is the Great Sphinx at Gîza, which looks towards the east.
The sacred emblem of the Heliopolitan Sun-god reminds us forcibly of the
Semitic _bethels_ or _baetyli_, the sacred stones of Palestine, and may
give yet another hint of the Semitic origin of the Heliopolitan cult.
In the court of the temple is a huge circular altar of fine alabaster,
several feet across, on which slain oxen were offered to the Sun, and
behind this, at the eastern end of the court, are six great basins of
the same stone, over which the beasts were slain, with drains running
out of them by which their blood was carried away. This temple is a most
interesting monument of the civilization of the “Old Kingdom” at the time
of the Vth Dynasty.

At Sakkâra itself, which lies a short distance south of Abusir, no new
royal tombs have, as has been said, been discovered of late years. But a
great deal of work has been done among the private mastaba-tombs by the
officers of the _Service des Antiquités_, which reserves to itself the
right of excavation here and at Dashûr. The mastaba of the sage and
writer Kagernna (or rather Gemnika, “I-have-found-a-ghost,” which
sounds very like an American Indian appellation) is very fine.
“I-have-found-a-ghost” lived in the reign of the king Tatkarâ Assa, the
“Tancheres” of Manetho, and he wrote maxims like his great contemporary
Phtahhetep (“Offered to Phtah”), who was also buried at Sakkâra. The
officials of the _Service des Antiquités_ who cleaned the tomb unluckily
misread his name Ka-bi-n (an impossible form which could only mean,
literally translated, “Ghost-soul-of” or “Ghost-soul-to-me”), and they
have placed it in this form over the entrance to his tomb. This mastaba,
like those, already known, of Mereruka (sometimes misnamed “Mera”)
and the famous Ti, both also at Sakkâra, contains a large number of
chambers, ornamented with reliefs. In the vicinity M. Grébaut, then
Director of the Service of Antiquities, discovered a very interesting
Street of Tombs, a regular Via Sacra, with rows of tombs of the
dignitaries of the VIth Dynasty on either side of it. They are generally
very much like one another; the workmanship of the reliefs is fine, and
the portrait of the owner of the tomb is always in evidence.

Several of the smaller mastabas have lately been disposed of to the
various museums, as they are liable to damage if they remain where they
stand; moreover, they are not of great value to the Museum of Cairo,
but are of considerable value to various museums which do not already
possess complete specimens of this class of tombs. A fine one, belonging
to the chief Uerarina, is now exhibited in the Assyrian Basement of the
British Museum; another is in the Museum of Leyden; a third at Berlin,
and so on. Most of these are simple tombs of one chamber. In the centre
of the rear wall we always see the _stele_ or gravestone proper,
built into the fabric of the tomb. Before this stood the low table
of offerings with a bowl for oblations, and on either side a tall
incense-altar. From the altar the divine smoke (_senetr_) arose when
the _hen-ka_, or priest of the ghost (literally, “Ghost’s Servant”),
performed his duty of venerating the spirits of the deceased, while the
_Kher-heb_, or cantor, enveloped in the mystic folds of the leopard-skin
and with bronze incense-burner in hand, sang the holy litanies and
spells which should propitiate the ghost and enable him to win his way
to ultimate perfection in the next world.

The stele is always in the form of a door with pyloni-form cornice. On
either side is a figure of the deceased, and at the sides are carved
prayers to Anubis, and at a later date to Osiris, who are implored to
give the funerary meats and “everything good and pure on which the god
there (as the dead man in the tomb has been constituted) lives;” often
we find that the biography and list of honorary titles and dignities of
the deceased have been added.

Sakkâra was used as a place of burial in the latest as well as in the
earliest time. The Egyptians of the XXVIth Dynasty, wearied of the long
decadence and devastating wars which had followed the glorious epoch of
the conquering Pharaohs of the XVIIIth and XIXth Dynasties, turned for
a new and refreshing inspiration to the works of the most ancient kings,
when Egypt was a simple self-contained country, holding no intercourse
with outside lands, bearing no outside burdens for the sake of pomp and
glory, and knowing nothing of the decay and decadence which follows in
the train of earthly power and grandeur. They deliberately turned their
backs on the worn-out and discredited imperial trappings of the Thothmes
and Ramses, and they took the supposed primitive simplicity of the
Snefrus, the Khufus, and the Ne-user-Râs for a model and ensampler to
their lives. It was an age of conscious and intended archaism, and in
pursuit of the archaistic ideal the Mem-phites of the Saïte age had
themselves buried in the ancient necropolis of Sakkâra, side by side
with their ancestors of the time of the Vth and VIth Dynasties. Several
of these tombs have lately been discovered and opened, and fitted with
modern improvements. One or two of them, of the Persian period, have
wells (leading to the sepulchral chamber) of enormous depth, down which
the modern tourist is enabled to descend by a spiral iron staircase. The
Serapeum itself is lit with electricity, and in the Tombs of the Kings
at Thebes nothing disturbs the silence but the steady thumping pulsation
of the dynamo-engine which lights the ancient sepulchres of the
Pharaohs. Thus do modern ideas and inventions help us to see and so to
understand better the works of ancient Egypt. But it is perhaps a little
too much like the Yankee at the Court of King Arthur. The interiors of
the later tombs are often decorated with reliefs which imitate those of
the early period, but with a kind of delicate grace which at once marks
them for what they are, so that it is impossible to confound them with
the genuine ancient originals from which they were adapted.

Riding from Sakkâra southwards to Dashûr, we pass on the way the
gigantic stone mastaba known as the _Mastabat el-Fara’ûn_, “Pharaoh’s
Bench.” This was considered to be the tomb of the Vth Dynasty king,
Unas, until his pyramid was found by Prof. Maspero at Sakkâra. From its
form it might be thought to belong to a monarch of the Hid Dynasty, but
the great size of the stone blocks of which it is built seems to point
rather to the XIIth. All attempts to penetrate its secret by actual
excavation have been unavailing.

Further south across the desert we see from the Mastabat el-Fara’ûn
four distinct pyramids, symmetrically arranged in two lines, two in each
line. The two to the right are great stone erections of the usual
type, like those of Gîza and Abusîr, and the southernmost of them has a
peculiar broken-backed appearance, due to the alteration of the angle
of inclination of its sides during construction. Further, it is covered
almost to the ground by the original casing of polished white limestone
blocks, so that it gives a very good idea of the original appearance
of the other pyramids, which have lost their casing. These two
pyramids very probably belong to kings of the Hid Dynasty, as does the
Step-Pyramid of Sakkâra. They strongly resemble the Gîza type, and
the northernmost of the two looks very like an understudy of the Great
Pyramid. It seems to mark the step in the development of the royal
pyramid which was immediately followed by the Great Pyramid. But no
excavations have yet proved the accuracy of this view. Both pyramids
have been entered, but nothing has been found in them. It is very
probable that one of them is the second pyramid of Snefru.

The other two pyramids, those nearest the cultivation, are of very
different appearance. They are half-ruined, they are black in colour,
and their whole effect is quite different from that of the stone
pyramids. For they are built of brick, not of stone. They are pyramids,
it is true, but of a different material and of a different date from
those which we have been describing. They are built above the sepulchres
of kings of the XIIth Dynasty, the Theban house which transferred
its residence northwards to the neighbourhood of the ancient Northern
capital. We have, in fact, reached the end of the Old Kingdom at
Sakkâra; at Dashûr begin the sepulchres of the Middle Kingdom. Pyramids
are still built, but they are not always of stone; brick is used,
usually with stone in the interior. The general effect of these brick
pyramids, when new, must have been indistinguishable from that of the
stone ones, and even now, when it has become half-ruined, such a great
brick pyramid as that of Usertsen (Senusret) III at Dashûr is not
without impressiveness. After all, there is no reason why a brick
building should be less admirable than a stone one. And in its own way
the construction of such colossal masses of bricks as the two eastern
pyramids of Dashûr must have been as arduous, even as difficult, as that
of building a moderate-sized stone pyramid. The photograph of the brick
pyramids of Dashûr on this page shows well the great size of these
masses of brickwork, which are as impressive as any of the great brick
structures of Babylonia and Assyria.

    [Illustration: EXTERIOR OF THE SOUTHERN BRICK PYRAMID OF DASHÛR:
    XIITH DYNASTY.
    Excavated by M. de Morgan, 1895. This is the secondary tomb of
    Amenemhat III; about 2200 B.C.

The XIIth Dynasty use of brick for the royal tombs was a return to the
custom of earlier days, for from the time of Aha to that Tjeser, from
the 1st Dynasty to the Hid, brick had been used for the building of the
royal mastaba-tombs, out of which the pyramids had developed.

At this point, where we take leave of the great pyramids of the Old
Kingdom, we may notice the latest theory as to the building of these
monuments, which has of late years been enunciated by Dr. Borchardt, and
is now generally accepted. The great Prussian explorer Lepsius, when he
examined the pyramids in the ‘forties, came to the conclusion that each
king, when he ascended the throne, planned a small pyramid for himself.
This was built in a few years’ time, and if his reign were short, or if
he were unable to enlarge the pyramid for other reasons, it sufficed for
his tomb. If, however, his reign seemed likely to be one of some length,
after the first plan was completed he enlarged his pyramid by building
another and a larger one around it and over it. Then again, when this
addition was finished, and the king still reigned and was in possession
of great resources, yet another coating, so to speak, was put on to the
pyramid, and so on till colossal structures like the First and Second
Pyramid of Giza, which, we know, belonged to kings who were unusually
long-lived, were completed. And finally the aged monarch died, and was
buried in the huge tomb which his long life and his great power had
enabled him to erect. This view appeared eminently reasonable at the
time, and it seemed almost as though we ought to be able to tell whether
a king had reigned long or not by the size of his pyramid, and even
to obtain a rough idea of the length of his reign by counting the
successive coats or accretions which it had received, much as we tell
the age of a tree by the rings in its bole. A pyramid seemed to have
been constructed something after the manner of an onion or a Chinese
puzzle-box.

Prof. Pétrie, however, who examined the Griza pyramids in 1881, and
carefully measured them all up and finally settled their trigonometrical
relation, came to the conclusion that Lepsius’s theory was entirely
erroneous, and that every pyramid was built and now stands as it was
originally planned. Dr.

[Illustration: 111.jpg THE PYRAMIDS OF GIZA DURING THE INUNDATION.]

Borchardt, however, who is an architect by profession, has examined
the pyramids again, and has come to the conclusion that Prof. Pétrie’s
statement is not correct, and that there is an element of truth in
Lepsius’s hypothesis. He has shown that several of the pyramids, notably
the First and Second at Giza, show unmistakable signs of a modified,
altered, and enlarged plan; in fact, long-lived kings like Khufu seem
to have added considerably to their pyramids and even to have entirely
remodelled them on a larger scale. This has certainly been the case with
the Great Pyramid. We can, then, accept Lepsius’s theory as modified by
Dr. Borchardt.

Another interesting point has arisen in connection with the Great
Pyramid. Considerable difference of opinion has always existed between
Egyptologists and the professors of European archaeology with regard
to the antiquity of the knowledge of iron in Egypt. The majority of
the Egyptologists have always maintained, on the authority of the
inscriptions, that iron was known to the ancient Egyptians from the
earliest period. They argued that the word for a certain metal in old
Egyptian was the same as the Coptic word for “iron.” They stated that in
the most ancient religious texts the Egyptians spoke of the firmament
of heaven as made of this metal, and they came to the conclusion that it
was because this metal was blue in colour, the hue of iron or steel; and
they further pointed out that some of the weapons in the tomb-paintings
were painted blue and others red, some being of iron, that is to
say, others of copper or bronze. Finally they brought forward as
incontrovertible evidence an actual fragment of worked iron, which had
been found between two of the inner blocks, down one of the air-shafts,
in the Great Pyramid. Here was an actual piece of iron of the time of
the IVth Dynasty, about 3500 B.C.

This conclusion was never accepted by the students of the development of
the use of metal in prehistoric Europe, when they came to know of it.
No doubt their incredulity was partly due to want of appreciation of the
Egyptological evidence, partly to disinclination to accept a conclusion
which did not at all agree with the knowledge they had derived from
their own study of prehistoric Europe. In Southern Europe it was quite
certain that iron did not come into use till about 1000 B.C.; in Central
Europe, where the discoveries at Hallstatt in the Salzkammergut exhibit
the transition from the Age of Bronze to that of Iron, about 800 B.C.
The exclusively Iron Age culture of La Tène cannot be dated earlier than
the eighth century, if as early as that. How then was it possible that,
if iron had been known to the Egyptians as early as 3500 B.C., its
knowledge should not have been communicated to the Europeans until over
two thousand years later? No; iron could not have been really known to
the Egyptians much before 1000 B.C. and the Egyptological evidence was
all wrong. This line of argument was taken by the distinguished
Swedish archaeologist, Prof. Oscar Montelius, of Upsala, whose previous
experience in dealing with the antiquities of Northern Europe, great as
it was, was hardly sufficient to enable him to pronounce with authority
on a point affecting far-away African Egypt. And when dealing with Greek
prehistoric antiquities Prof. Montelius’s views have hardly met with
that ready agreement which all acknowledge to be his due when he is
giving us the results of his ripe knowledge of Northern antiquities. He
has, in fact, forgotten, as most “prehistoric” archaeologists do forget,
that the antiquities of Scandinavia, Greece, Egypt, the Semites,
the bronze-workers of Benin, the miners of Zimbabwe, and the Ohio
mound-builders are not to be treated all together as a whole, and that
hard and fast lines of development cannot be laid down for them, based
on the experience of Scandinavia.

We may perhaps trace this misleading habit of thought to the influence
of the professors of natural science over the students of Stone Age and
Bronze Age antiquities. Because nature moves by steady progression and
develops on even lines--_nihil facit per sal-tum_--it seems to have been
assumed that the works of man’s hands have developed in the same way,
in a regular and even scheme all over the world. On this supposition it
would be impossible for the great discovery of the use of iron to have
been known in Egypt as early as 3500 B.C. for this knowledge to have
remained dormant there for two thousand years, and then to have
been suddenly communicated about 1000 B.C. to Greece, spreading with
lightning-like rapidity over Europe and displacing the use of bronze
everywhere. Yet, as a matter of fact, the work of man does develop
in exactly this haphazard way, by fits and starts and sudden leaps of
progress after millennia of stagnation. Throwsback to barbarism are just
as frequent. The analogy of natural evolution is completely inapplicable
and misleading.

Prof. Montelius, however, following the “evolutionary” line of thought,
believed that because iron was not known in Europe till about 1000 B.C.
it could not have been known in Egypt much earlier; and in an important
article which appeared in the Swedish ethnological journal _Ymer_ in
1883, entitled _Bronsaldrn i Egypten_ (“The Bronze Age in Egypt”), he
essayed to prove the contrary arguments of the Egyptologists wrong. His
main points were that the colour of the weapons in the frescoes was of
no importance, as it was purely conventional and arbitrary, and that the
evidence of the piece of iron from the Great Pyramid was insufficiently
authenticated, and therefore valueless, in the absence of other definite
archaeological evidence in the shape of iron of supposed early date. To
this article the Swedish Egyptologist, Dr. Piehl, replied in the same
periodical, in an article entitled _Bronsaldem i Egypten_, in which he
traversed Prof. Montelius’s conclusions from the Egyptological point of
view, and adduced other instances of the use of iron in Egypt, all,
it is true, later than the time of the IVth Dynasty. But this protest
received little notice, owing to the fact that it remained buried in
a Swedish periodical, while Prof. Montelius’s original article was
translated into French, and so became well-known.

For the time Prof. Montelius’s conclusions were generally accepted, and
when the discoveries of the prehistoric antiquities were made by M. de
Morgan, it seemed more probable than ever that Egypt had gone through a
regular progressive development from the Age of Stone through those of
copper and bronze to that of iron, which was reached about 1100 or 1000
B.C. The evidence of the iron fragment from the Great Pyramid was put on
one side, in spite of the circumstantial account of its discovery
which had been given by its finders. Even Prof. Pétrie, who in 1881
had accepted the pyramid fragment as undoubtedly contemporary with that
building, and had gone so far as to adduce additional evidence for its
authenticity, gave way, and accepted Montelius’s view, which held its
own until in 1902 it was directly controverted by a discovery of Prof.
Pétrie at Abydos. This discovery consisted of an undoubted fragment of
iron found in conjunction with bronze tools of VIth Dynasty date; and it
settled the matter.[1] The VIth Dynasty date of this piece of iron, which
was more probably worked than not (since it was buried with tools), was
held to be undoubted by its discoverer and by everybody else, and, if
this were undoubted, the IVth Dynasty date of the Great Pyramid fragment
was also fully established. The discoverers of the earlier fragment had
no doubt whatever as to its being contemporary with the pyramid, and
were supported in this by Prof. Pétrie in 1881. Therefore it is now
known to be the fact that iron was used by the Egyptians as early as
3500 B.C.[2]

     [1] See H. R. Hall’s note on “The Early Use of Iron in Egypt,”
      in _Man_ (the organ of the Anthropological Society of
     London), iii (1903), No. 86.

     [2] Prof. Montelius objected to these conclusions in a review
     of the British Museum “Guide to the Antiquities of the
     Bronze Age,” which was published in Man, 1005 (Jan.), No 7.
     For an answer to these objections, see Hall, ibid., No. 40.

It would thus appear that though the Egyptians cannot be said to have
used iron generally and so to have entered the “Iron Age” before about
1300 B.C. (reign of Ramses II), yet iron was well known to them and had
been used more than occasionally by them for tools and building purposes
as early as the time of the IVth Dynasty, about 3500 B.C. Certainly
dated examples of its use occur under the IVth, VIth, and XIIIth
Dynasties. Why this knowledge was not communicated to Europe before
about 1000 B.C. we cannot say, nor are Egyptologists called upon to find
the reason. So the Great Pyramid has played an interesting part in the
settlement of a very important question.

It was supposed by Prof. Pétrie that the piece of iron from the Great
Pyramid had been part of some arrangement employed for raising the
stones into position. Herodotus speaks of the machines, which were used
to raise the stones, as made of little pieces of wood. The generally
accepted explanation of his meaning used to be that a small crane or
similar wooden machine was used for hoisting the stone by means
of pulley and rope; but M. Legrain, the director of the works of
restoration in the Great Temple of Karnak, has explained it differently.
Among the “foundation deposits” of the XVIIIth Dynasty at Dêr el-Bahari
and elsewhere, beside the little plaques with the king’s name and the
model hoes and vases, was usually found an enigmatic wooden object like
a small cradle, with two sides made of semicircular pieces of wood,
joined along the curved portion by round wooden bars. M. Legrain has now
explained this as a model of the machine used to raise heavy stones from
tier to tier of a pyramid or other building, and illustrations of
the method of its use may be found in Choisy’s _Art de Bâtir chez les
anciens Egyptiens_. There is little doubt that this primitive machine
is that to which Herodotus refers as having been used in the erection of
the pyramids.

The later historian, Diodorus, also tells us that great mounds or ramps
of earth were used as well, and that the stones were dragged up these
to the requisite height. There is no doubt that this statement also is
correct. We know that the Egyptians did build in this very way, and
the system has been revived by M. Legrain for his work at Karnak, where
still exist the remains of the actual mounds and ramps by which the
great western pylon was erected in Ptolemaïc times. Work carried on
in this way is slow and expensive, but it is eminently suited to the
country and understood by the people. If they wish to put a great stone
architrave weighing many tons across the top of two columns, they do not
hoist it up into position; they rear a great ramp or embankment of earth
against the two pillars, half-burying them in the process, then drag
the architrave up the ramp by means of ropes and men, and put it into
position. Then the ramp is cleared away. This is the ancient system
which is now followed at Karnak, and it is the system by which, with the
further aid of the wooden machines, the Great Pyramid and its compeers
were erected in the days of the IVth Dynasty. _Plus cela change, plus
c’est la même chose_.

The brick pyramids of the XIIth Dynasty were erected in the same way,
for the Egyptians had no knowledge of the modern combination of wooden
scaffolding and ladders. There was originally a small stone pyramid of
the same dynasty at Dashûr, half-way between the two brick ones, but
this has now almost disappeared. It belonged to the king Amenemhat II,
while the others belonged, the northern to Usertsen (Sen-usret) III, the
southern to Amenemhat III. Both these latter monarchs had other tombs
elsewhere, Usertsen a great rock-cut gallery and chamber in the cliff at
Abydos, Amenemhat a pyramid not very far to the south, at Hawara, close
to the Fayyûm. It is uncertain whether the Hawara pyramid or that of
Dashûr was the real burial-place of the king, as at neither place is his
name found alone. At Hawara it is found in conjunction with that of his
daughter, the queen-regnant Se-bekneferurâ (Skemiophris), at Dashûr with
that of a king Auabrâ Hor, who was buried in a small tomb near that of
the king, and adjoining the tombs of the king’s children. Who King Hor
was we do not quite know. His name is not given in the lists, and was
unknown until M. de Morgan’s discoveries at Dashûr. It is most probable
that he was a prince who was given royal honours during the lifetime of
Amenemhat III, whom he predeceased.[3] In the beautiful wooden statue
of him found in his tomb, which is now in the Cairo Museum, he is
represented as quite a youth. Amenemhat III was certainly succeeded by
Amenemhat IV, and it is impossible to intercalate Hor between them.

     [3] See below, p. 121. Possibly he was a son of Amenemhat III.

The identification of the owners of the three western pyramids of Dashûr
is due to M. de Morgan and his assistants, Messrs. Legrain and Jéquier,
who excavated them from 1894 till 1896. The northern pyramid, that of
Usertsen (Senusret) III, is not so well preserved as the southern. It is
more worn away, and does not present so imposing an appearance. In
both pyramids the outer casing of white stone has entirely disappeared,
leaving only the bare black bricks. Each stood in the midst of a great
necropolis of dignitaries of the period, as was usually the case.
Many of the mastabas were excavated by M. de Morgan. Some are of older
periods than the XIIth Dynasty, one belonging to a priest of King
Snefru, Aha-f-ka (“Ghost-fighter”), who bore the additional titles of
“director of prophets and general of infantry.” There were pluralists
even in those days. And the distinction between the privy councillor
(Geheimrat) and real privy councillor (Wirk-licher-Greheimrat) was quite
familiar; for we find it actually made, many an old Egyptian officially
priding himself in his tomb on having been a real privy councillor! The
Egyptian bureaucracy was already ancient and had its survivals and its
anomalies even as early as the time of the pyramid-builders.

In front of the pyramid of Usertsen (Senusret) III at one time stood the
usual funerary temple, but it has been totally destroyed. By the side of
the pyramid were buried some of the princesses of the royal family, in
a series of tombs opening out of a subterranean gallery, and in this
gallery were found the wonderful jewels of the princesses Sit-hathor and
Merit, which are among the greatest treasures of the Cairo Museum. Those
who have not seen them can obtain a perfect idea of their appearance
from the beautiful water-colour paintings of them by M. Legrain, which
are published in M. de Morgan’s work on the “Fouilles à Dahchour”
 (Vienna, 1895). Altogether one hundred and seven objects were recovered,
consisting of all kinds of jewelry in gold and coloured stones. Among
the most beautiful are the great “pectorals,” or breast-ornaments, in
the shape of pylons, with the names of Usertsen II, Usertsen III, and
Amenemhat III; the names are surrounded by hawks standing on the sign
for gold, gryphons, figures of the king striking down enemies, etc., all
in _cloisonné_ work, with beautiful stones such as lapis lazuli, green
felspar, and carnelian taking the place of coloured enamels. The massive
chains of golden beads and cowries are also very remarkable. These
treasures had been buried in boxes in the floor of the subterranean
gallery, and had luckily escaped the notice of plunderers, and so by a
fortunate chance have survived to tell us what the Egyptian jewellers
could do in the days of the XIIth Dynasty. Here also were found two
great Nile barges, full-sized boats, with their oars and other gear
complete. They also may be seen in the Museum of Cairo. It can only be
supposed that they had served as the biers of the royal mummies, and had
been brought up in state on sledges. The actual royal chamber was not
found, although a subterranean gallery was driven beneath the centre of
the pyramid.