
Now the Sky-god of Edfu is in legend a conquering hero who advances
down the Nile valley, with his _Mesniu_, or “Smiths,” to overthrow the
people of the North, whom he defeats in a great battle near Dendera.
This may be a reminiscence of the first fights of the invaders with the
Neolithic inhabitants. The other form of Horus, “Horus, son of Isis,”
has also a body of retainers, the _Shemsu-Heru_, or “Followers of
Horns,” who are spoken of in late texts as the rulers of Egypt before
the monarchy. They evidently correspond to the dynasties of _Manes_,
Νεκύες or “Ghosts,” of Manetho, and are probably intended for the early
kings of Hierakonpolis.

The mention of the Followers of Horus as “Smiths” is very interesting,
for it would appear to show that the Semitic conquerors were notable
as metal-users, that, in fact, their conquest was that old story in the
dawn of the world’s history, the utter overthrow and subjection of the
stone-users by the metal-users, the primeval tragedy of the supersession
of flint by copper. This may be, but if the “Smiths” were the Semitic
conquerors who founded the kingdom, it would appear that the use of
copper was known in Egypt to some extent before their arrival, for we
find it in the graves of the late Neolithic Egyptians, very sparsely
from “sequence-date 30” to “45,” but afterwards more commonly. It was
evidently becoming known. The supposition, however, that the “Smiths”
 were the Semitic conquerors, and that they won their way by the aid of
their superior weapons of metal, may be provisionally accepted.

In favour of the view which would bring the conquerors by way of the
Wadi Hammamat, an interesting discovery may be quoted. Immediately
opposite Den-dera, where, according to the legend, the battle between
the _Mesniu_ and the aborigines took place, lies Koptos, at the mouth of
the Wadi Hammamat. Here, in 1894, underneath the pavement of the ancient
temple, Prof. Petrie found remains which he then diagnosed as belonging
to the most ancient epoch of Egyptian history. Among them were some
extremely archaic statues of the god Min, on which were curious
scratched drawings of bears, _crioceras-shells_, elephants walking over
hills, etc., of the most primitive description. With them were lions’
heads and birds of a style then unknown, but which we now know to belong
to the period of the beginning of the Ist Dynasty. But the statues of
Min are older. The _crioceras-shells_ belong to the Red Sea. Are we to
see in these statues the holy images of the conquerors from the Red Sea
who reached the Nile valley by way of the Wadi Hammamat, and set up the
first memorials of their presence at Koptos? It may be so, or the Min
statues may be older than the conquerors, and belong to the Neolithic
race, since Min and his fetish (which we find on the slate palette from
el-’Amra, already mentioned) seem to belong to the indigenous Nilotes.
In any case we have in these statues, two of which are in the Ashmolean
Museum at Oxford, probably the most ancient cult-images in the world:

This theory, which would make all the Neolithic inhabitants of Egypt
one people, who were conquered by a Semitic race, bringing a culture of
Sumerian origin to Egypt by way of the Wadi Hammamat, is that generally
accepted at the present time. It may, however, eventually prove
necessary to modify it. For reasons given above, it may well be that the
Neolithic population was itself not indigenous, and that it reached the
Nile valley by way of the Wadi Hammamat, spreading north and south
from the mouth of the _wadi_. It may also be considered probable that
a Semitic wave invaded Egypt by way of the Isthmus of Suez, where
the early sun-cultus of Heliopolis probably marks a primeval Semitic
settlement. In that case it would seem that the _Mesniu_ or “Smiths,”
 who introduced the use of metal, would have to be referred to the
originally Neolithic pre-Semitic people, who certainly were acquainted
with the use of copper, though not to any great extent. But this is not
a necessary supposition. The _Mesniu_ are closely connected with the
Sky-god Horus, who was possibly of Semitic origin, and another Semitic
wave, quite distinct from that which entered Egypt by way of the
Isthmus, may very well also have reached Egypt by the Wadi Hammamat, or,
equally possibly, from the far south, coming down to the Nile from the
Abyssinian mountains. The legend of the coming of Hathor from Ta-neter
may refer to some such wandering, and we know that the Egyptians of the
Old Kingdom communicated with the Land of Punt, not by way of the Red
Sea coast as Hatshepsut did, but by way of the Upper Nile. This would
tally well with the march of the _Mesniu_ northwards from Edfu to their
battle with the forces of Set at Dendera.

In any case, at the dawn of connected Egyptian history, we find two main
centres of civilization in Egypt, Heliopolis and Buto in the Delta
in the North, and Edfu and Hierakonpolis in the South. Here were
established at the beginning of the Chalcolithic stage of culture, we
may say, two kingdoms, of Lower and Upper Egypt, which were eventually
united by the superior arms of the kings of Upper Egypt, who imposed
their rule upon the North but at the same time removed their capital
thither. The dualism of Buto and Hierakonpolis really lasted throughout
Egyptian history. The king was always called “Lord of the Two Lands,”
 and wore the crowns of Upper and Lower Egypt; the snakes of Buto and
Nekhebet (the goddess of Nekheb, opposite Nekhen or Hierakonpolis)
always typified the united kingdom. This dualism of course often led to
actual division and reversion to the predynastic order of things, as,
for instance, in the time of the XXIst Dynasty.

It might well seem that both the impulses to culture development in the
North and South came from Semitic inspiration, and that it was to
the Semitic invaders in North and South that the founding of the two
kingdoms was due. This may be true to some extent, but it is at the same
time very probable that the first development of political culture at
Hierakonpolis was really of pre-Semitic origin. The kingdom of Buto,
since its capital is situated so near to the seacoast, may have owed
its origin to oversea Mediterranean connections. There is much in
the political constitution of later Egypt which seems to have been of
indigenous and pre-Semitic origin. Especially does this seem to be so in
the case of the division and organization of the country into nomes. It
is obvious that so soon as agriculture began to be practised on a large
scale, boundaries would be formed, and in the unique conditions of
Egypt, where all boundaries disappear beneath the inundation every
year, it is evident that the fixing of division-lines as permanently as
possible by means of landmarks was early essayed. We can therefore with
confidence assign the formation of the nomes to very early times. Now
the names of the nomes and the symbols or emblems by which they were
distinguished are of very great interest in this connection. They are
nearly all figures of the magic animals of the primitive religion, and
fetish-emblems of the older deities. The names are, in fact, those of
the territories of the Neolithic Egyptian tribes, and their emblems are
those of the protecting tribal demons. The political divisions of the
country seem, then, to be of extremely ancient origin, and if the nomes
go back to a time before the Semitic invasions, so may also the kingdoms
of the South and North.

Of these predynastic kingdoms we know very little, except from legendary
sources. The Northerners who were conquered by Aha, Narmer, and
Khâsekhehiui do not look very much like Egyptians, but rather resemble
Semites or Libyans. On the “Stele of Palermo,” a chronicle of early
kings inscribed in the period of the Vth Dynasty, we have a list of
early kings of the North,--Seka, Desau, Tiu, Tesh, Nihab, Uatjântj,
Mekhe. The names are primitive in form. We know nothing more about them.
Last year Mr. C. T. Currelly attempted to excavate at Buto, in order to
find traces of the predynastic kingdom, but owing to the infiltration of
water his efforts were unsuccessful. It is improbable that anything is
now left of the most ancient period at that site, as the conditions in
the Delta are so very different from those obtaining in Upper Egypt.
There, at Hierakonpolis, and at el-Kab on the opposite bank of the Nile,
the sites of the ancient cities Nekhen and Nekheb, the excavators have
been very successful. The work was carried out by Messrs. Quibell and
Green, in the years 1891-9. Prehistoric burials were found on the hills
near by, but the larger portion of the antiquities were recovered from
the temple-ruins, and date back to the beginning of the 1st Dynasty,
exactly the time when the kings of Hierakonpolis first conquered the
kingdom of Buto and founded the united Egyptian monarchy.

The ancient temple, which was probably one of the earliest seats of
Egyptian civilization, was situated on a mound, now known as _el-Kom
el-ahmar_, “the Red Hill,” from its colour. The chief feature of the
most ancient temple seems to have been a circular mound, revetted by a
wall of sandstone blocks, which was apparently erected about the end of
the predynastic period. Upon this a shrine was probably erected. This
was the ancient shrine of Nekhen, the cradle of the Egyptian monarchy.
Close by it were found some of the most valuable relics of the earliest
Pharaonic age, the great ceremonial mace-heads and vases of Narmer and
“the Scorpion,” the shields or “palettes” of the same Narmer, the vases
and stelas of Khâsekhemui, and, of later date, the splendid copper
colossal group of King Pepi I and his son, which is now at Cairo. Most
of the 1st Dynasty objects are preserved in the Ashmo-lean Museum at
Oxford, which is one of the best centres for the study of early Egyptian
antiquities. Narmer and Khâsekhemui are, as we shall see, two of the
first monarchs of all Egypt. These sculptured and inscribed mace-heads,
shields, etc., are monuments dedicated by them in the ancestral shrine
at Hierakonpolis as records of their deeds. Both kings seem to have
waged war against the Northerners, the _Anu_ of Heliopolis and the
Delta, and on these votive monuments from Hierakonpolis we find
hieroglyphed records of the defeat of the _Anu_, who have very
definitely Semitic physiognomies.

On one shield or palette we see Narmer clubbing a man of Semitic
appearance, who is called the “Only One of the Marsh” (Delta), while
below two other Semites fly, seeking “fortress-protection.” Above is a
figure of a hawk, symbolizing the Upper Egyptian king, holding a rope
which is passed through the nose of a Semitic head, while behind is a
sign which may be read as “the North,” so that the whole symbolizes the
leading away of the North into captivity by the king of the South. It
is significant, in view of what has been said above with regard to the
probable Semitic origin of the Heliopolitan Northerners, to find the
people typical of the North-land represented by the Southerners as
Semites. Equally Semitic is the overthrown Northerner on the other
side of this well-known monument which we are describing; he is being
trampled under the hoofs and gored by the horns of a bull, who, like the
hawk, symbolizes the king. The royal bull has broken down the wall of a
fortified enclosure, in which is the hut or tent of the Semite, and the
bricks lie about promiscuously.

In connection with the Semitic origin of the Northerners, the form of
the fortified enclosures on both sides of this monument (that to whose
protection the two Semites on one side fly, and that out of which the
kingly bull has dragged the chief on the other) is noticeable. As usual
in Egyptian writing, the hieroglyph of these buildings takes the form of
a plan. The plan shows a crenelated enclosure, resembling the walls of
a great Babylonian palace or temple, such as have been found at Telloh,
Warka, or Mukayyar. The same design is found in Egypt at the Shuret
ez-Zebib, an Old Kingdom fortress at Abydos, in the tomb of King Aha at
Nakâda, and in many walls of mastaba-tombs of the early time. This is
another argument in favour of an early connection between Egypt and
Babylonia. We illustrate a fragment of another votive shield or palette
of the same kind, now in the museum of the Louvre, which probably came
originally from Hierakonpolis. It is of exactly similar workmanship to
that of Narmer, and is no doubt a fragment of another monument of that
king. On it we see the same subject of the overthrowing of a Northerner
(of Semitic aspect) by the royal bull. On one side, below, is a
fortified enclosure with crenelated walls of the type we have described,
and within it a lion and a vase; below this another fort, and a bird
within it. These signs may express the names of the two forts, but,
owing to the fact that at this early period Egyptian orthography was
not yet fixed, we cannot read them. On the other side we see a row of
animated nome-standards of Upper Egypt, with the symbols of the god Min
of Koptos, the hawk of Horus of Edfu, the ibis of Thot of Eshmunên, and
the jackals of Anubis of Abydos, which drag a rope; had we the rest
of the monument, we should see, bound at the end of the rope, some
prisoner, king, or animal symbolic of the North. On another slate
shield, which we also reproduce, we see a symbolical representation of
the capture of seven Northern cities, whose names seem to mean the “Two
Men,” the “Heron,” the “Owl,” the “Palm,” and the “Ghost” Cities.

“Ghost City” is attacked by a lion, “Owl City” by a hawk, “Palm City” by
two hawk nome-standards, and another, whose name we cannot guess at, is
being opened up by a scorpion.

[Illustration: 050.jpg (left) OBVERSE OF A SLATE RELIEF.]

The operating animals evidently represent nomes and tribes of the Upper
Egyptians. Here again we see the same crenelated walls of the Northern
towns, and there is no doubt that this slate fragment also, which is
preserved in the Cairo Museum, is a monument of the conquests of Narmer.
It is executed in the same archaic style as those from Hierakonpolis.
The animals on the other side no doubt represent part of the spoil of
the North.

Returning to the great shield or palette found by Mr. Quibell, we see
the king coming out, followed by his sandal-bearer, the _Hen-neter_ or
“God’s Servant,”[8] to view the dead bodies of the slain Northerners which
lie arranged in rows, decapitated, and with their heads between their
feet. The king is preceded by a procession of nome-standards.

[Illustration: 051.jpg (right)]

Above the dead men are symbolic representations of a hawk perched on a
harpoon over a boat, and a hawk and a door, which doubtless again refer
to the fights of the royal hawk of Upper Egypt on the Nile and at the
gate of the North. The designs on the mace-heads refer to the same
conquest of the North.

     [8] In his commentary (Hierakonpolis, i. p. 9) on this scene,
     Prof. Petrie supposes that the seven-pointed star sign means
     “king,” and compares the eight-pointed star “used for king
     in Babylonia.” The eight-pointed star of the cuneiform
     script does not mean “king,” but “god.” The star then ought
     to mean “god,” and the title “servant of a god,” and this
     supposition may be correct. _Hen-neter_, “god’s servant,”
      was the appellation of a peculiar kind of priest in later
     days, and was then spelt with the ordinary sign for a god,
     the picture of an axe. But in the archaic period, with which
     we are dealing, a star like the Babylonian sign may very
     well have been used for “god,” and the title of Narmer’s
     sandal-bearer may read _Hen-neter_. He was the slave of the
     living god Narmer. All Egyptian kings were regarded as
     deities, more or less.

The monuments Khâsekhemui, a king, show us that he conquered the North
also and slew 47,209 “Northern Enemies.” The contorted attitudes of the
dead Northerners were greatly admired and sketched at the time, and were
reproduced on the pedestal of the king’s statue found by Mr. Quibell,
which is now at Oxford. It was an age of cheerful savage energy, like
most times when kingdoms and peoples are in the making. About 4000 B.C.
is the date of these various monuments.

[Illustration: 052.jpg OBVERSE OP A SLATE RELIEF.]

Khâsekhemui probably lived later than Narmer, and we may suppose that
his conquest was in reality a re-conquest. He may have lived as late
as the time of the IId Dynasty, whereas Narmer must be placed at the
beginning of the Ist, and his conquest was probably that which first
united the two kingdoms of the South and North. As we shall see in
the next chapter, he is probably one of the originals of the legendary
“Mena,” who was regarded from the time of the XVIIIth Dynasty onwards
as the founder of the kingdom, and was first made known to Europe by
Herodotus, under the name of “Menés.”

[Illustration: 053.jpg REVERSE OF A SLATE RELIEF, REPRESENTING ANIMALS.]

Narmer is therefore the last of the ancient kings of Hierakonpolis, the
last of Manetho’s “Spirits.” We may possibly have recovered the names of
one or two of the kings anterior to Narmer in the excavations at Abydos
(see Chapter II), but this is uncertain. To all intents and purposes we
have only legendary knowledge of the Southern kingdom until its close,
when Narmer the mighty went forth to strike down the Anu of the North,
an exploit which he recorded in votive monuments at Hierakonpolis, and
which was commemorated henceforward throughout Egyptian history in the
yearly “Feast of the Smiting of the Anu.” Then was Egypt for the first
time united, and the fortress of the “White Wall,” the “Good Abode” of
Memphis, was built to dominate the lower country. The Ist Dynasty was
founded and Egyptian history began.

[Illustration: 054.jpg ]




CHAPTER II--ABYDOS AND THE FIRST THREE DYNASTIES


Until the recent discoveries had been made, which have thrown so much
light upon the early history of Egypt, the traditional order and names
of the kings of the first three Egyptian dynasties were, in default of
more accurate information, retained by all writers on the history of the
period. The names were taken from the official lists of kings at Abydos
and elsewhere, and were divided into dynasties according to the system
of Manetho, whose names agree more or less with those of the lists and
were evidently derived from them ultimately. With regard to the fourth
and later dynasties it was clear that the king-lists were correct, as
their evidence agreed entirely with that of the contemporary monuments.
But no means existed of checking the lists of the first three dynasties,
as no contemporary monuments other than a IVth Dynasty mention of a IId
Dynasty king, Send, had been found. The lists dated from the time of
the XVIIIth and XIXth Dynasties, so that it was very possible that with
regard to the earliest dynasties they might not be very correct. This
conclusion gained additional weight from the fact that no monuments of
these earliest kings were ever discovered; it therefore seemed probable
that they were purely legendary figures, in whose time (if they ever did
exist) Egypt was still a semi-barbarous nation. The jejune stories told
about them by Manetho seemed to confirm this idea. Mena, the reputed
founder of the monarchy, was generally regarded as a historical figure,
owing to the persistence of his name in all ancient literary accounts
of the beginnings of Egyptian history; for it was but natural to suppose
that the name of the man who unified Egypt and founded Memphis would
endure in the mouths of the people. But with regard to his successors
no such supposition seemed probable, until the time of Sneferu and the
pyramid-builders.

This was the critical view. Another school of historians accepted all
the kings of the lists as historical _en bloc_, simply because the
Egyptians had registered their names as kings. To them Teta, Ateth, and
Ata were as historical as Mena.

Modern discovery has altered our view, and truth is seen to lie between
the opposing schools, as usual. The kings after Mena do not seem to be
such entirely unhistorical figures as the extreme critics thought;
the names of several of them, e.g. Merpeba, of the Ist Dynasty, are
correctly given in the later lists, and those of others were simply
misread, e. g. that of Semti of the same dynasty, misread “Hesepti” by
the list-makers. On the other hand, Mena himself has become a somewhat
doubtful quantity. The real names of most of the early monarchs of Egypt
have been recovered for us by the latest excavations, and we can now see
when the list-makers of the XIXth Dynasty were right and when they were
wrong, and can distinguish what is legendary in their work from what is
really historical. It is true that they very often appear to have been
wrong, but, on the other hand, they were sometimes unexpectedly near
the mark, and the general number and arrangement of their kings
seems correct; so that we can still go to them for assistance in the
arrangement of the names which are communicated to us by the newly
discovered monuments. Manetho’s help, too, need never be despised
because he was a copyist of copyists; we can still use him to direct our
investigations, and his arrangement of dynasties must still remain the
framework of our chronological scheme, though he does not seem to have
been always correct as to the places in which the dynasties originated.

More than the names of the kings have the new discoveries communicated
to us. They have shed a flood of light on the beginnings of Egyptian
civilization and art, supplementing the recently ascertained facts
concerning the prehistoric age which have been described in the
preceding chapter. The impulse to these discoveries was given by the
work of M. de Morgan, who excavated sites of the early dynastic as
well as of the predynastic age. Among these was a great mastaba-tomb at
Nakâda, which proved to be that of a very early king who bore the name
of Aha, “the Fighter.” The walls of this tomb are crenelated like
those of the early Babylonian palaces and the forts of the Northerners,
already referred to. M. de Morgan early perceived the difference between
the Neolithic antiquities and those of the later archaic period of
Egyptian civilization, to which the tomb at Nakâda belonged. In the
second volume of his great work on the primitive antiquities of Egypt
_(L’Age des Métaux et lé Tombeau Royale de Négadeh)_, he described
the antiquities of the Ist Dynasty which had been found at the time he
wrote. Antiquities of the same primitive period and even of an earlier
date had been discovered by Prof. Flinders Petrie, as has already been
said, at Koptos, at the mouth of the Wadi Hammamat. But though Prof.
Petrie correctly diagnosed the age of the great statues of the god
Min which he found, he was led, by his misdating of the “New Race”
 antiquities from Ballas and Tûkh, also to misdate several of the
primitive antiquities,--the lions and hawks, for instance, found at
Koptos, he placed in the period between the VIIth and Xth Dynasties;
whereas they can now, in the light of further discoveries at Abydos, be
seen to date to the earlier part of the Ist Dynasty, the time of Narmer
and Aha.

It is these discoveries at Abydos, coupled with those (already
described) of Mr. Quibell at Hierakonpolis, which have told us most of
what we know with regard to the history of the first three dynasties.
At Abydos Prof. Petrie was not himself the first in the field, the site
having already been partially explored by a French Egyptologist, M.
Amélineau. The excavations of M. Amélineau were, however, perhaps
not conducted strictly on scientific lines, and his results have been
insufficiently published with very few photographs, so that with the
best will in the world we are unable to give M. Amélineau the full
credit which is, no doubt, due to him for his work. The system of Prof.
Petrie’s publications has been often, and with justice, criticized, but
he at least tells us every year what he has been doing, and gives us
photographs of everything he has found. For this reason the epoch-making
discoveries at Abydos have been coupled chiefly with the name of Prof.
Petrie, while that of M. Amélineau is rarely heard in connection with
them. As a matter of fact, however, M. Amélineau first excavated the
necropolis of the early kings at Abydos, and discovered most of the
tombs afterwards worked over by Prof. Petrie and Mr. Mace. Yet most of
the important scientific results are due to the later explorers, who
were the first to attempt a classification of them, though we must
add that this classification has not been entirely accepted by the
scientific world.

The necropolis of the earliest kings of Egypt is situated in the great
bay in the hills which lies behind Abydos, to the southwest of the main
necropolis. Here, at holy Abydos, where every pious Egyptian wished to
rest after death, the bodies of the most ancient kings were buried. It
is said by Manetho that the original seat of their dominion was This,
a town in the vicinity of Abydos, now represented by the modern Grîrga,
which lies a few miles distant from its site (el-Birba). This may be a
fact, but we have as yet obtained no confirmation of it. It may well be
that the attribution of a Thinite origin to the Ist and IId Dynasties
was due simply to the fact that the kings of these dynasties were buried
at Abydos, which lay within the Thinite nome. Manetho knew that they
were buried at Abydos, and so jumped to the conclusion that they lived
there also, and called them “Thinites.”

[Illustration: 060.jpg PROF. PETRIE’S CAMP AT ABYDOS, 1901.]

Their real place of origin must have been Hierakonpolis, where the
pre-dynastic kingdom of the South had its seat. The Hid Dynasty was no
doubt of Memphite origin, as Manetho says. It is certain that the
seat of the government of the IVth Dynasty was at Memphis, where the
pyramid-building kings were buried, and we know that the sepulchres
of two Hid Dynasty kings, at least, were situated in the necropolis of
Memphis (Sakkâra-Mêdûm). So that probably the seat of government was
transferred from Hierakonpolis to Memphis by the first king of the Hid
Dynasty. Thenceforward the kings were buried in the Memphite necropolis.

The two great nécropoles of Memphis and Abydos were originally the
seats of the worship of the two Egyptian gods of the dead, Seker and
Khentamenti, both of whom were afterwards identified with the Busirite
god Osiris. Abydos was also the centre of the worship of Anubis, an
animal-deity of the dead, the jackal who prowls round the tombs at
night. Anubis and Osiris-Khentamenti, “He who is in the West,” were
associated in the minds of the Egyptians as the protecting deities of
Abydos. The worship of these gods as the chief Southern deities of the
dead, and the preeminence of the necropolis of Abydos in the South, no
doubt date back before the time of the Ist Dynasty, so that it would
not surprise us were burials of kings of the predynastic Hierakonpolite
kingdom discovered at Abydos. Prof. Petrie indeed claims to have
discovered actual royal relics of that period at Abydos, but this seems
to be one of the least certain of his conclusions. We cannot definitely
state that the names “Ro,” “Ka,” and “Sma” (if they are names at all,
which is doubtful) belong to early kings of Hierakonpolis who were
buried at Abydos. It may be so, but further confirmation is desirable
before we accept it as a fact; and as yet such confirmation has not been
forthcoming. The oldest kings, who were certainly buried at Abydos, seem
to have been the first rulers of the united kingdom of the North and
South, Aha and his successors. N’armer is not represented. It may
be that he was not buried at Abydos, but in the necropolis of
Hierakonpolis. This would point to the kings of the South not having
been buried at Abydos until after the unification of the kingdom.

That Aha possessed a tomb at Abydos as well as another at Nakâda seems
peculiar, but it is a phenomenon not unknown in Egypt. Several kings,
whose bodies were actually buried elsewhere, had second tombs at Abydos,
in order that they might _possess_ last resting-places near the tomb
of Osiris, although they might not prefer to _use_ them. Usertsen (or
Senusret) III is a case in point. He was really buried in a pyramid at
Illahun, up in the North, but he had a great rock tomb cut for him in
the cliffs at Abydos, which he never occupied, and probably had never
intended to occupy. We find exactly the same thing far back at the
beginning of Egyptian history, when Aha possessed not only a great
mastaba-tomb at Nakâda, but also a tomb-chamber in the great necropolis
of Abydos. It may be that other kings of the earliest period also had
second sepulchres elsewhere. It is noteworthy that in none of the early
tombs at Abydos were found any bodies which might be considered those
of the kings themselves. M. Amélineau discovered bodies of attendants
or slaves (who were in all probability purposely strangled and buried
around the royal chamber in order that they should attend the king
in the next world), but no royalties. Prof. Petrie found the arm of a
female mummy, who may have been of royal blood, though there is nothing
to show that she was. And the quaint plait and fringe of false hair,
which were also found, need not have belonged to a royal mummy. It is
therefore quite possible that these tombs at Abydos were not the actual
last resting-places of the earliest kings, who may really have been
buried at Hierakonpolis or elsewhere, as Aha was. Messrs. Newberry
and Gtarstang, in their _Short History of Egypt_, suppose that Aha was
actually buried at Abydos, and that the great tomb with objects bearing
his name, found by M. de Morgan at Nakâda, is really not his, but
belonged to a royal princess named Neit-hetep, whose name is found in
conjunction with his at Abydos and Nakâda. But the argument is equally
valid turned round the other way: the Nakâda tomb might just as well be
Aha’s and the Abydos one Neit-hetep’s. Neit-hetep, who is supposed by
Messrs. Newberry and Garstang to have been Narmer’s daughter and Aha’s
wife, was evidently closely connected with Aha, and she may have been
buried with him at Nakâda and commemorated with him at Abydos.[1] It is
probable that the XIXth Dynasty list-makers and Manetho considered the
Abydos tombs to have been the real graves of the kings, but it is by no
means impossible that they were wrong.

     [1] A princess named Bener-ab (“Sweet-heart”), who may have
     been Aha’s daughter, was actually buried beside his tomb at
     Abydos.

This view of the royal tombs at Abydos tallies to a great extent with
that of M. Naville, who has energetically maintained the view that M.
Amélineau and Prof. Petrie have not discovered the real tombs of the
early kings, but only their contemporary commemorative “tombs” at
Abydos. The only real tomb of the Ist Dynasty, therefore, as yet
discovered is that of Aha at Nakâda, found by M. de Morgan. The fact
that attendant slaves were buried around the Abydos tombs is no bar to
the view that the tombs were only the monuments, not the real graves,
of the kings. The royal ghosts would naturally visit their commemorative
chambers at Abydos, in order to be in the company of the great Osiris,
and ghostly servants would be as necessary to their Majesties at Abydos
as elsewhere.

It must not be thought that this revised opinion of the Abydos tombs
detracts in the slightest degree from the importance of the discovery of
M. Amélineau and its subsequent and more detailed investigation by Prof.
Petrie. These monuments are as valuable for historical purposes as
the real tombs themselves. The actual bodies of these primeval kings
themselves we are never likely to find. The tomb of Aha at Nakâda had
been completely rifled in ancient times.

The commemorative tombs of the kings of the Ist and IId Dynasties at
Abydos lie southwest of the great necropolis, far within the bay in the
hills. Their present aspect is that of a wilderness of sand hillocks,
covered with masses of fragments of red pottery, from which the site has
obtained the modern Arab name of _Umm el-Ga’ab_, “Mother of Pots.” It
is impossible to move a step in any direction without crushing some
of these potsherds under the heel. They are chiefly the remains of the
countless little vases of rough red pottery, which were dedicated here
as _ex-votos_ by the pious, between the XIXth and XXVIth Dynasties, to
the memory of the ancient kings and of the great god Osiris, whose tomb,
as we shall see, was supposed to have been situated here also.

[Illustration: 065.jpg (right) THE TOMB OF KING DEN AT ABYDOS. About
4000 B.C.]

Intermingled with these later fragments are pieces of the original
Ist Dynasty vases, which were filled with wine and provisions and were
placed in the tombs, for the refreshment and delectation of the royal
ghosts when they should visit their houses at Abydos. These were thrown
out and broken when the tombs were violated. Here and there one sees a
dip in the sand, out of which rise four walls of great bricks, forming
a rectangular chamber, half-filled with sand. This is one of the royal
tomb-chambers of the Ist Dynasty. That of King Den is illustrated above.
A straight staircase descends into it from the ground-level above. In
several of the tombs the original flooring of wooden beams is still
preserved. Den’s is the most magnificent of all, for it has a floor of
granite blocks; we know of no other instance of stone being used for
building in this early age. Almost every tomb has been burnt at some
period unknown. The brick walls are burnt red, and many of the alabaster
vases are almost calcined. This was probably the work of some unknown
enemy.

The wide complicated tombs have around the main chamber a series of
smaller rooms, which were used to store what was considered necessary
for the use of the royal ghost. Of these necessaries the most
interesting to us are the slaves, who were, as there is little reason to
doubt, purposely killed and buried round the royal chamber so that their
spirits should be on the spot when the dead king came to Abydos; thus
they would be always ready to serve him with the food and other things
which had been stored in the tomb with them and placed under their
charge. There were stacks of great vases of wine, corn, and other food;
these were covered up with masses of fat to preserve the contents,
and they were corked with a pottery stopper, which was protected by
a conical clay sealing, stamped with the impress of the royal
cylinder-seal. There were bins of corn, joints of oxen, pottery dishes,
copper pans, and other things which might be useful for the ghostly
cuisine of the tomb. There were numberless small objects, used, no
doubt, by the dead monarch during life, which he would be pleased to see
again in the next world,--carved ivory boxes, little slabs for grinding
eye-paint, golden buttons, model tools, model vases with gold tops,
ivory and pottery figurines, and other _objets d’art_; the golden royal
seal of judgment of King Den in its ivory casket, and so forth. There
were memorials of the royal victories in peace and war, little ivory
plaques with inscriptions commemorating the founding of new buildings,
the institution of new religious festivals in honour of the gods, the
bringing of the captives of the royal bow and spear to the palace, the
discomfiture of the peoples of the North-land.

[Illustration: 067.jpg CONICAL VASE-STOPPERS. From Abydos. 1st Dynasty:
about 4000 B.C.]

All these things, which have done so much to reconstitute for us the
history of the earliest period of the Egyptian monarchy, were placed
under the care of the dead slaves whose bodies were buried round the
empty tomb-chamber of their royal master in Abydos.

The killing and entombment of the royal servants is of the highest
anthropological interest, for it throws a vivid light upon the manners
of the time. It shows the primeval Egyptians as a semi-barbaric people
of childishly simple ways of thought. The king was dead. For all his
kingship he was a man, and no man was immortal in this world. But yet
how could one really die? Shadows, dreams, all kinds of phenomena which
the primitive mind could not explain, induced the belief that, though
the outer man might rot, there was an inner man which could not die
and still lived on. The idea of total death was unthinkable. And where
should this inner man still live on but in the tomb to which the outer
man was consigned? And here, doubtless it was believed, in the house to
which the body was consigned, the ghost lived on. And as each ghost had
his house with the body, so no doubt all ghosts could communicate with
one another from tomb to tomb; and so there grew up the belief in a
tomb-world, a subterranean Egypt of tombs, in which the dead Egyptians
still lived and had their being. Later on the boat of the sun, in which
the god of light crossed the heavens by day, was thought to pass through
this dead world between his setting and his rising, accompanied by the
souls of the righteous. But of this belief we find no trace yet in the
ideas of the Ist Dynasty. All we can see is that the _sahus_, or bodies
of the dead, were supposed to reside in awful majesty in the tomb,
while the ghosts could pass from tomb to tomb through the mazes of
the underworld. Over this dread realm of dead men presided a dead god,
Osiris of Abydos; and so the necropolis of Abydos was the necropolis of
the underworld, to which all ghosts who were not its rightful citizens
would come from afar to pay their court to their ruler. Thus the man
of substance would have a monumental tablet put up to himself in this
necropolis as a sort of _pied-à-terre_, even if he could not be buried
there; for the king, who, for reasons chiefly connected with local
patriotism, was buried near the city of his earthly abode, a second tomb
would be erected, a stately mansion in the city of Osiris, in which his
ghost could reside when it pleased him to come to Abydos.